---
title: Phylogenetic Analysis
---

## Background

A critical component of understanding an organism is situating it within the
broader context of the tree of life. Phylogenetics is the field of biology that
quantifies evolutionary relationships between organisms, both on the individual
gene and whole organism level. In bacteria, the ribosomal RNA small subunit (
also called the 16S subunit, or SSU) is highly conserved due to its vital
function in protein translation. Certain parts of the SSU that are not critical
to the enzymatic function of the RNA molecule are less constrained and therefore
vary between different evolutionary lineages. The SSU therefore acts as a
'fingerprint' that can be used to compare different bacteria and assess
evolutionary relationships. These relationships are often expressed as a
phylogenetic tree that depicts the evolutionary distances between all pairs of a
set of genetically diverse sequences or organisms.

## Problem statement

Use the predicted gene sequences extracted from the genome with RAST to perform
a phylogenetic tree analysis and place our organism with the broader context of
bacterial life.

## Baseline

Examine the predicted transcriptome sequences and identify those that correspond
to the small ribosomal subunit (SSU). Isolate those sequences from the
transcriptome to their own fasta file, and combine them with the provided set of
other SSU sequences, linked below. Perform a multiple sequence alignment of the
SSU sequences using the program `mafft`. Then compute a phylogenetic tree using
the multiple sequence alignment you obtained.

### Inputs

* Predicted transcriptome you extracted with the RAST annotation
* This [database of SSU sequences](http://lmgtfy.com) that represents the major
  bacterial taxonomic groups

### Outputs

* A phylogenetic tree in XXX format

### Instructions

### Hints

## Challenge

### Inputs

### Outputs

### Hints
